To look at the earliest available sources using ἱστορία and ἱστορέω, I focused on scholia attributed to Hesiod, Stasinus, and the authors of the epic cycles.

We also have a single scholion attributed to “οἱ ἀρχαῖοι,” though this is just a brief mention on how the name Briseis is actually her patronymic; her real name is either Astynome or Hippodamia.

We have three scholia attributed to Hesiod. The first explains why Nestor is referred to as Geranian despite ruling Pylos: he was raised in Gerenia while his father Neleus lived in Pylos with his other sons. However, Nestor’s whole family was killed when Heracles sacked the city. This scholion also includes the fascinating detail that Neleus’ Periclymenus managed to actually battle Heracles in the form of a bee, though his efforts were futile. The second scholion credits Hesiod along with Demetrius for a story involving Achilles’ capture of the city Pedasus. The Achaeans attacked the city since it was an ally of Troy, but during the conflict a young girl who lived in the city fell in love with Achilles and threw an apple towards him inscribed with a message declaring her feelings. She also provided the Achaeans with water, which was apparently scarce in the area. Hesiod’s final scholion is shared with Bacchylides and is a retelling of the famous abduction of Europa by Zeus in the form of a bull. This scholion was interesting since it appears to identify the character Sarpedon in the Iliad as the Cretan son of Europa despite the poem itself making him the Lycian son of Zeus and Laodamia.

We have two scholia attributed to Stasinus, the alleged author of the Cypria. The first attempts to explain the words “Διὸς βουλὴν” in the opening lines of the Iliad. The scholion recounts how there were so many people roaming the earth it actually caused Gaea pain, so to ease her suffering Zeus engineered the Trojan War to kill off a substantial number of the human race; in this respect, the events of the Iliad do indeed happen according to the will of Zeus. The second provides a backstory for Achilles’ spear: it was a wedding gift to his father Peleus at his wedding to Thetis. While the poem itself identifies it as a gift from the centaur Chiron, the scholion mentions Athena and Hephaistos as other possible creators.

The first scholion credit to the poets of the Epic Cycle as a whole is a general guide for the origins of the constellations: the Pleiades as the daughters of Atlas, Orion as a mighty hunter and companion of Artemis, and Ursa Major and Ursa Minor as two people who prayed to the gods to be saved from danger (no mention of the popular story of Callisto). The second explains why Apollo is invoked during a boxing contest: Phorbas was an arrogant boxer who forced passersby to fight him to the death. Eventually, Apollo killed him in a boxing match and became known as the god of boxing.

All of these scholia are meant to clarify or at least offer more backstory on aspects of the Iliad which may be confusing without outside knowledge. I find it interesting that even within a scholion ascribed to a particular author, there are often still numerous versions of a story present. I am also intrigued that, while scholists typically strive to prove the veracity of Homer, some of these scholia seem to contradict what the poem tells us (Sarpedon’s backstory, who made Achilles’ spear). This just seems to prove that, even in this more specific scholiastic view of myth, these stories still exist in countless forms and do not have one "official" version. However, by referencing works as early as these, perhaps the scholiasts believe they are adding more legitimacy to their notes.
